The Moss Report is brought to you by
[music] MycoLife, makers of the world's
best mushroom extracts, including the
Moss Method mushroom formula, available
[music] exclusively at mycolife.us.
In August of 2025, my father and I sat
down with Professor Thomas Seyfried of
Boston College to get an update on his
research into mitochondrial and
metabolic theory of cancer.
As we were talking, one name kept coming
up, a colleague of his in Budapest,
Hungary, who occupied something of a
pivotal role in the development of this
important work.
A few months later, in October, I flew
to Budapest to interview him.
I'll share that conversation with you in
a moment, but first, here's Professor
Seyfried from that earlier interview,
link to the full video in the
description.
There's now massive evidence
presented that all major cancers have
some uh defect in the number structure
and function of the mitochondria,
uh all of which creates an environment
uh where um mutations occur as a
downstream effect uh of the damage to
the regulation of energy metabolism.
Otto Warburg um
was the first to discover the origin of
cancer as a mitochondrial metabolic
disease back in the 1920s and '30s, but
his failure to recognize that there is a
second fermentable fuel, which is
glutamine, and the mechanism for that,
which is mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorylation, was not known to him.
We teamed up with uh Christos
Chinopoulos, the world expert on
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorylation, which is a fermentation
mechanism inside the mitochondria
itself. So, these cancer cells are doing
nothing more than falling back on these
ancient fermentation pathways. Christos
Chinopoulos at Semmelweis University,
who is the world leader on understanding
substrate level phosphorylation. He
looked at my diagram he says now now now
now that's not right. So but he said
your idea is really exciting but he said
the pathway you have is not right. So we
then over the last you know 15 years
designed experiments to get to the right
pathway and then figuring it out.
Warburg was correct he just didn't have
the all the stuff put together. So we
can take the whole cancer field and put
it back on the right track. The
mitochondrial metabolic theory will
replace the somatic mutation theory and
all other theories because it's the only
theory that it can account best for the
facts of the disease.
I don't give a damn what anybody says. I
mean this is absolutely a mitochondrial
metabolic disease which now opens a
whole new world of way to attack this
problem.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Hello healers. My name is Ben and this
is the Moss Report.
I'm here in Budapest, Hungary outside of
Semmelweis University where we're going
to be meeting with Dr. Christos
Chinopoulos who is a world-renowned
biochemist, researcher, and professor
here at the university. And we're going
to be discussing his ideas and his
research into mitochondrial and
metabolic theory of cancer.
So we'll go inside now and we'll meet
with Dr. Chinopoulos.
Dr. Chinopoulos, thank you very for
seeing us. My pleasure.
>> Taking the time out of your busy
schedule.
So, how many students
are here
at the university? Okay, so we have
three faculties. Okay. English,
Hungarian, and German.
>> Okay.
And um
there are uh
uh Okay, so there are 500 medical
biochemistry students English, about
double Hungarian,
and
about 300 German.
>> Wow. And that's for
Yeah, that's for biochemistry. Almost
2,000 students.
>> Yeah, yeah, but this is a lot. This is
only for biochemistry, but you know we
have many other faculties. That's only
in biochemistry. Yes.
>> So, that must be the biggest
biochemistry department in
Europe.
Well, or one of them, maybe? Yes, yes,
we have we have a lot. So,
the construction that you see over
there, it is the building two. Being
built.
>> Oh, we're going to increase the number
of the students already two times.
Professor, thank you so much for taking
the time to talk with us. Thank you for
coming over here. Recently, we had a
conversation with Professor Thomas
Seyfried. Okay.
Fascinating conversation. Um my father
and myself and Dr. Seyfried sat down. He
brought us up to speed with what his his
developments at Boston College are
in terms of furthering
the understanding of the mitochondrial
and metabolic theory, as he calls it.
Is that the same thing that you feel
like you're working on here? Is that the
same terminology? Yes, we are absolutely
on the same page with Professor
Seyfried, with Tom.
Uh
we we uh speak very often on on the same
subject, especially even today,
in the afternoon,
uh his student is having his uh PhD
defense, on which I'm an opponent, and
exactly on the topic that you just
mentioned. So,
ever since I I talked with Professor
Seyfried, we are exactly on the same
page, exactly on the
mitochondrial aspect of of cancer and
how can cancer be dealt with from the
metabolic aspect of view. We have a few,
of course,
uh scientific-based
disagreements, obviously, uh but
otherwise, yes, we we are we are we are
we are we are foot soldiers on the same
battle. Well, he spoke very highly of
you. In fact, he credited you with
having sort of helped him,
you know, review his own theory and his
own research and maybe collaborate uh on
some ideas. And when I heard him mention
you, it just sounded like it would be
great to come here and talk with you a
little bit about the type of work that
you're doing. And you've just gotten
done telling me that in this university,
there's over almost 2,000 students in
biochemistry alone at this university,
which is amazing. And you have a central
role here both in the administration,
but your primary role is as a
researcher. Yes, my primary role is
um
heading the um
let's say the oncometabolism unit of the
biochemistry department.
Uh it wasn't always the case. I
originally
started from neurodegenerative diseases.
mitochondrial aspect of
neurodegenerative diseases.
>> Interesting.
But
I realized that all those metabolic
pathways that I thought need to be
rescued in order to to cure or prevent
the neurodegeneration neurodegenerative
disease
would be the exact same pathways that
the cancer would use to thrive in
adverse microenvironments. So, I made
the jump about 15 years ago Uh-huh. from
neurodegeneration to cancer metabolism.
And it has been It has been a I think a
pretty good
jump because because unfortunately with
neurodegeneration, you can't really help
people as a preventive measure. But
But But you But you can in
But you can for for cancer patients.
There is There's a lot that can be done
from the metabolic and mitochondrial
aspect on on on cancer patients. Mhm.
And one of the topics that we discussed
with Professor Seyfried
was how the work that he's doing and
that you're doing is building on and in
some ways correcting the work of the
Nobel Prize winning scientist Otto
Warburg.
Do you feel as though you've made some
real leaps and bounds in terms of
advancing the discoveries that he came
up with and
and what would those advancements be?
Yes. So,
we do have contributions, no matter how
small they may be, but we do have
contributions in
highlighting the importance of
metabolism in on cancer. Luckily, we're
not the only ones.
But unfortunately, this
field this subfield has not gained
sufficient traction yet.
You can see it on the level of
advancement preclinically, which is
huge, but does not yet apply on clinical
trials. So, that means that the general
public or or let's say lawmakers or even
or even clinical doctors have do not
really
adopt the possibility that
there can be and there should be an
aspect of treating a cancer patient from
the metabolic point of view.
A main concern of of an oncologist of a
current oncologist or a surgeon
is that
uh, a
a cancer patient has to eat well, okay?
He He has to avoid cachexia. Mhm. And
that that that is very difficult to go
against and tell to to to to the to the
to the caring physician that your
patient has to actually go on a diet, a
ketogenic diet. That's very hard to
pass. Mhm. So Right.
So
So we have to So we have to,
Professor Seyfried and I are are are
working on on on proving
Well, that Well, on proving
scientifically,
and others, of course, as well,
how important is it is
uh, to enforce
metabolic aspects on a therapeutic, uh,
level on cancer patients. Okay.
So the work that you're doing is mostly
laboratory work. It's not clinical
studies. Well, it is Yes, that's that's
correct. I do have, um,
a clinical couple of levels of
interaction in the clinic. One is that
we, uh, receive a lot of, um,
human tumor material for which, uh, we
do, um
uh,
you can say basic biochemical work, but
it can be used for diagnostic purposes
as well. Okay. And plus, we have a drug
in a pipeline that, uh, I'm very much
hope to collaborate with someone who
have who has hands-on and and can can
try such a drug. So
there's two aspects of how cancer cells
get their energy.
Through glycolysis, through conversion
of of glucose into energy, which is
something that healthy cells also do.
But cancer cells being a little bit
different, or maybe significantly
different from healthy cells, they're
also using glutamine and fermenting
glutamine
to produce energy, which, the way that
Professor Seyfried described it, is sort
of a holdover from an ancient you know,
way of having energy for microorganisms
and the issue that it seems to be
focused on right now is okay, if we have
a ketogenic diet, we can affect
the amount of glucose in the body by
getting into nutritional ketosis.
So we have the ability to reduce the
amount of glucose coming in and feeding
the cancer for its growth.
But we don't really seem to have yet the
ability to effectively and in a
non-toxic way or less toxic way affect
the glutaminolysis pathway, the ability
of the cancer to ferment
glutamine, the amino acid glutamine, to
convert that into energy and glutamine
being the most abundant amino acid in
the body.
Anyway, this is what I understand is the
challenge. Is that a fair summation of
of the type of thinking about this that
you have
as well? Okay, so let me put it a little
bit on
Thank you. I appreciate [clears throat]
the education. Okay, so
it is an over over simplification, but
you are
but they but this concept is correct
that
the tumor and of course highly
proliferating cells as well require
glucose and glutamine. Obviously other
things are required as well, okay?
And
it is not really possible to cut down to
or prevent the provision of glutamine to
cancer cells
and also it is also not possible, I
think, to
prevent
or to diminish the provision of glucose
as well, no matter how much
how strong a person can can indulge in
ketogenic diet. However, having said
that,
it is very very helping for the patient
to do the ketogenic diet because of the
so-called ancillary effects.
The ancillary effects are many. I will
just tell them as simple as possible.
One of them is that the ketones formed
in the body themselves, they have really
really good effects in fighting cancer.
One of them is beta-hydroxybutyrate, for
example. You may even take this as a
supplement. But best way to do this is
to do the ketogenic diet. So when you
are on a diet, you can decrease glucose
concentration in the blood
significantly, but I think not to the
extent that would
not be sufficiently available for the
tumor to take up and perform whatever
whatever it can do from from glycolysis.
Um
that's one thing.
But having said that, I reiterate that
performing I mean going into a ketogenic
diet is it's an absolute must. I think
it has to be implemented in the vast
majority of cancer patients. There is a
very minor fraction of cancer patients
that would not benefit from ketogenic
diet.
But the vast majority would be um
uh would see an additive, if not
synergistic therapeutic, benefit from
whatever chemotherapy or radiotherapy
regime they are getting.
And the other thing what you mentioned
about Yes.
>> me pause you. So if I'm understanding
you correctly, you're saying that it's
the presence of the ketones
that has an anti-cancer effect, not
necessarily the nutrients or the other
aspects of reducing glucose that
ketogenic diet might Presence of
ketones, that's one thing. The other one
is the
um
obesity is a kind of a pro-inflammatory
state, right? So if you decrease
obesity, you you push your body to to uh
secrete
uh type of substances that are
anti-inflammatory.
If you are obese, you are actually into
a kind of a chronic inflammatory state.
So, if you lose weight,
you you helped against inflammation.
Inflammation is bad generally speaking
is generally for for for most types of
cancer.
That's one aspect.
So, ketosis and the inflammatory
signals,
other ones are that
when you eat glucose,
then in order to for glucose to be
assimilated into
certain types of cells, you need to
produce insulin as well. And insulin has
effects other than
introducing glucose into the cell. And
these insulin effects are helping
cancers to grow and metastasize very
strongly. So, if you don't eat glucose,
you don't produce the insulin, which
doesn't have the cancer
increasing effects.
>> Now, is this part of what you have
personally researched and discovered?
>> No, that's not our field.
I do write reviews about this.
>> Okay. [laughter] And this is something
that we teach in our curriculum as well.
>> Okay. So, where is that Where is that
primarily being Where Where is that
information about insulin being
This is actually not a new thing.
So, so it it it is it is a it is a
a positive byproduct of not eating
glucose that you don't have insulin that
would stimulate the cancer cells to
proliferate and metastasize.
>> I did not know that.
>> Yes, and it's not just the insulin, but
it's also there are proteins that bind
insulin
and also bind insulin-like proteins. And
these are called
the insulin-like proteins. They are
called insulin-like growth factors.
So, so when you secrete when you eat
glucose, you have increase in insulin.
Okay, you have increase in insulin-like
growth factors, and you have increase in
the insulin-like growth factors binding
proteins. All these three things, they
tell the cancer
grow up. So, if you don't eat glucose,
you don't have any of those. And
on the other hand as well, if you don't
have insulin, you have glucagon. And
glucagon has inhibitory effects. Mhm.
So, overall, it's really good not to eat
glucose. Very good to go into ketogenic
diet because of
beta for example ketone body production.
So, but I don't think it helps from the
point of view that you can
limit the amount of glucose that can
enter a solid tumor or or a liquid tumor
like a blood tumor. Mhm.
So, I agree completely with Seyfried
that people should not eat sugar at all.
They should go on a ketogenic diet. I
don't I disagree partially with him
regarding as of why, but I don't think
it matters.
Just to go on a ketogenic diet. Okay.
Now, you had mentioned that you're doing
some drug development. So, Professor
Seyfried mentioned that he was doing
some laboratory research with mice
utilizing a
fairly toxic form of chemotherapy called
DON, which I can't remember the full
name of. I'm sure you know it. But
but that what struck me was that the
toxicity level of that drug in the mouse
model was lower when the mice were in
ketosis. Yes. Fascinating. That yes, so
and this is true not just for this drug
but for other drugs as well. And also
for radiotherapy as well. So, ketogenic
diet
helps to decrease the dose of the
chemotherapeutic agent, which means less
side effects. And also assists in
radiotherapy, so you have to irradiate
patient at lower
amounts. Okay. So, ketogenic diet is
doing it by many different ways. One is
because ketogenic diet strengthens your
immune system. You want to have a really
strong immune system to fight the
problems that chemotherapy and
radiotherapy
exerts on the on the market.
>> can be very immunosuppressive. Yes.
Now, uh the the problem with DON uh is
two main problems. One is that
um
the normal immune cells that fight
cancer
are also dependent on the
glutaminolysis.
So, if you give the drug that is
inhibiting glutaminolysis, you don't
inhibit just the cancer, but inhibit
your own cells Okay.
>> requiring glutaminolysis. That's one
thing.
And the other thing is
>> T-cells, and dendritic cells perhaps, or
just right across the board. Yes, well,
across the board, but some of course
more some cells are more important than
others.
>> Right. So, it's immunosuppressive. Yes,
it will have an immune which you don't
want that.
>> No.
And the other problem with DON is that
uh
you want to prevent
uh a catabolite of glutamine inside the
cell
from entering the glutaminolysis
pathway, and DON blocks only one pathway
of glutamine entering the cell. So, you
still have the other one. Mhm. Okay. So,
I mean, as an adjuvant therapy, DON is
okay, but you there are these two
problems. You cannot add too much
because you kill your immune cells.
>> Right. And if and if you add too too
much, you you won't be able to block
glutaminolysis completely. Now, I don't
want to pry too much into your
intellectual property. Obviously, you're
in drug
>> I will
I I will I will ask too much, I would
think.
Wait, wait, wait. That's important that
you bring it up.
>> Okay.
I'm not going to patent the drug. Oh,
no. No. Really? Yeah. Oh, wow. I'm not
after the money.
>> Okay. Because if I patent the drug, then
it's going to, you know, uh that doesn't
help people. It takes a lot of time. It
doesn't To me, it doesn't make any
sense. I I
I don't care. I'm not after money. If I
were after the money, I wouldn't be
sitting here. I would be in finance or
something else.
So,
the drug Well, thank you. Well, if it
works No, well Thank me after it works.
Thank you for doing the work and for
your commitment to furthering in science
as a as a goal rather than than the
profit aspect of it because that's to
worry. it's really it's it it would warm
my heart, truly. I'm I'm I'm glad you
say this.
Uh that wasn't my goal, but I'm glad you
say this. So, um the drug inhibits
something much more downstream.
So, so you have let's say, okay, drug
inhibits
path A, but you have path B, you have
path C. So, so this drug inhibits
something quite downstream. And luckily,
that downstream path is not so important
for the immune cell, but I believe it's
very critically important for the cancer
cell. And Professor Sifri knows this
pathway. This is called the substrate
level phosphorylation.
>> Right. We discussed that a little bit.
So, we have been able to uh to um
uh manufacture such a drug, identified
first from a from a library, and
manufactured and within the next few uh
months, we will be testing it on on
cancer models.
Okay.
Hopefully see Well, of course, we wish
you the best of luck with that research.
Was that based off of something that was
in existence already? Is it based off of
a a repurposed drug that you're
modifying, or really did you come up
with this from [clears throat] scratch
based on what you know about that
particular pathway and things that can
affect it? Okay. So, um
um the desire of having a drug against
this pathway has been a desire of mine
since I I started this cancer metabolism
>> So, that's 15 years ago. Yeah, because
because I I saw from neurodegenerative
pathways that substrate level
phosphorylation helps
uh cells which are in a very bad shape.
And then I see that cancer cells use the
exact same pathway to thrive under
adverse conditions. So, I always wanted
to do that. So, we tried we started
trying first uh small drug libraries,
okay, but a small drug libraries in the
order of thousands, and
even though it the number sounds much,
but it isn't. So, if you really want to
screen drugs that you may find a hit.
You have to go into the millions.
And recently there was um
uh a protocol which was uh I think uh
implemented by an American company which
is called DNA encoded library. So, the
DNA encoded library is what they have is
that they manufacture 10 million
compounds.
Okay? They put it into a single vial.
And then each each compound
has attached on it a DNA sequence. Okay?
Then what you do is that you add your
target to your vial.
And if something will bind strongly to
your target, then you elute it. It means
you just wash it off. And then you just
have to identify the DNA sequence. And
you go back into your table and you find
out, okay, it was this sequence or it
was that drug. Wow. And then you go to
into a chemist and you tell him, okay,
can you please make this for me?
Which is which is usually simple because
I mean out of the 10 million compounds
that they made it they obviously chose
something which is which is easy to do.
And and then once you identify the
molecule
and you say, okay, it has some activity,
then [snorts] you can start working on
altering that molecule. Put a methyl
group there. Put a double bond there.
You know, things like that. But at least
you have a so-called hit.
Okay? And then you go from hit to lead.
So, with that we have been able to um I
I got a grant a couple of years ago in
purchasing the library because the
library was expensive. Sure. And and
then we got uh five hits and they have
been
we have been able to manufacture them. I
think
uh three out of five last month.
And and we are going to be starting
testing them on cancer models as well.
Of course, if it works on cancer models,
meaning on cell cultures, it doesn't
mean it's going to work in a in a
multicellular organism. It's going to
doesn't mean it's going to work on mice,
humans, and everything. But but we will
cross that bridge when we get there.
What you said was that it's not
targeting the good time analysis
pathway.
You said it's something that's
downstream of uh of that. Can you
elaborate a little bit more on what that
means? Okay. So, well, um
uh the glutaminolysis pathway means that
you take glutamine
and from the glutamine you are going to
branch practically into two things. One
is into making lipids
and one will be for making um a little
bit of ATP without the without uh
requiring oxygen in the process.
>> Right. Okay? And this this is called
substrate-level phosphorylation.
However,
the substrate-level phosphorylation is
important because
not just from the point of view that it
gives you energy in the form of ATP, but
it does that in a very small
compartment, which is the mitochondrion.
Mhm. So, uh the mitochondrion
uh there are several hundred
mitochondria per cell,
but their volume is much smaller than
that of the volume of the whole cell.
So, what happens is that you are having
formation of ATP within a very small
volume. That means that you have
immediately a very uh rapid increase in
the concentration because you simply
have very few of something, but in a
very small space. That means you have an
increase in local concentration, and
that has a great effect
on on um
on uh several mechanisms
uh inside and outside mitochondria. One
of the most important mechanism is that
preventing mitochondria from becoming
ATP consumers.
So, mitochondria are made to give us
ATP, but if uh conditions are not
optimal, they're very punishing. They're
going to consume ATP. They're going to
be ATP sinks.
And if you provide ATP locally within
mitochondria, that is going to maintain
them as ATP producers, not consumers.
>> Mhm.
So, uh this is something I think that
cancer cells rely very much because
uh the cancer cells rely rely on
biosynthetic pathways. I mean, more
cancer cell means they have to make more
membranes, more organelles, more this,
more that.
>> Right. And you need some for that. Yes,
you need energy. And you don't get this
from the so-called traditional oxidative
phosphorylation. Right. You have to get
from somewhere. And on top of that, you
cannot have mitochondria consuming
whatever ATP is there if you want to go
into biosynthetic processes. So, this
substrate-level phosphorylation, I
believe it's an Achilles' heel Mhm. for
cancer cells. So, really it's about
looking at what the essential
differences are between a cancer cell
and a healthy cell Yes. and working to
leverage that difference
to be able to affect the cancer cells
specifically.
>> Exactly. Now, one aspect
This was one aspect. The other aspect is
that
normal cells use oxidative
phosphorylation. Right. They don't care
that much if you inhibit substrate-level
phosphorylation. So, I think that is
going to help against having serious
side effects.
>> Right. So, this is the the very good
thing about this.
>> Right. So, it really feels like you're
honing in on the essential difference
and Yes. and how to sort of tweak that
to
affect the cancer cells specifically
without affecting healthy cells.
>> Yes. And it doesn't need to be a
monotherapy. I don't care. It can be,
you know, as part of polytherapy.
>> Right.
Well, that's again going back to what we
were discussing with Professor Seyfried
was that he's looking to also do some
things that are a combination therapy.
Yes. Uh including ketogenic diet and
some kind of a chemical uh introduced
that that leverages that difference.
Yes. Well, regarding the the other types
of therapy these days, so there have
been
couple of really good uh um
breakthrough discoveries.
Uh one of them was that um I do not know
if you're familiar with Kras gene.
>> of it. Okay. So, Kras has been
considered undruggable for many years,
but uh recently there have been
a couple of drugs discovered that they
can inhibit Kras, and they have moved
immediately into clinical trials. So,
usually it takes 7 to 10 years to go
into this, but because because of the uh
potential um positive impact, they have
moved immediately into into applying
this into patients. That's one thing.
And the other one is that there has been
great improvement in
um immune checkpoint inhibitors. So,
these are drugs that they help your
immune system to identify and kill
specifically the cancerous cells.
>> Right. So, if you have the immune point
inhibitors, you have the Kras
inhibitors, you have the you have the
ketogenic diet, maybe you are going to
have
the drug that we are developing or
something like this. I think that is
going to have a synergistic effect, not
the negative
>> Mhm. in increasing the life expectancy
and life quality of of cancer patients.
Well, I really love the fact that you
brought up the importance of having a
healthy immune system and having the
immune system be the the sort of driving
force at at getting rid of the cancer
once that cancer has been identified.
Does your protocol sort of help the
body's immune system also recognize this
or would a something like an immune
checkpoint inhibitor drug be part of a
protocol that would be included in
something that is more of a
mitochondrial focused? Right. Well, at
the moment uh at the at the very moment,
um we're not concerned yet of the immune
uh aspect because we would step too much
outside of our expertise and our our
know-hows.
>> I understand. But, when we get to the
point that
we would need to collaborate, let's say
with an uncle team if it is to have our
drug as part of the regime, then yes,
this is something that we'd have to
consider. But but but not yet. So, I
guess the next question that I would
want to ask would really be um
what what is the future of your research
here looking like? And and it's really a
two-part question. So, you said you're
in drug development, so obviously that's
part of it.
And you're looking at phosphorylation,
that part of it has been a central focus
of your research as well. Yes. And using
that DNA library to try to find hits and
then explore those different aspects,
right? So, is that a fair summary of
Yes. what the process looks like for
you? Spot on. Yes.
>> Okay. But we have other other leads as
well.
Um
regarding of course all revolving around
the concept of glutaminolysis and sub
level phosphorylation. There are a
couple of drugs which are arsenic-based
drugs.
>> Arsenic? Yes. So, arsenic is a is a is a
term that you know People think it's a
poison.
>> Yes, but but actually it is. Yes.
>> But but
it can also be used as an anti-cancer
therapy and there are there are a couple
of them which are FDA-and
approved agents. Well, I don't think it
should be so surprising because if you
think about how chemotherapy got its
origins, I mean it's toxic.
>> It's a poison. Yeah. Yes. And we have a
grant proposal with four main
institutions. One of them is from
Michigan, another one Germany, Greece,
and Italy. Okay. And they are supplying
us with arsenic-based formulations in
nanoparticle liposomes or conjugated
with with platinum.
With platins.
And in order to deliver the arsenic in
as least concentration as possible
because because glutaminolysis is very
sensitive to arsenic inhibition.
Interesting.
>> I think this is the reason why arsenic
is very good in killing cancer cells. Of
course, it has its own toxicity, so it
has to be kept to a minimum, but that's
exactly what we're trying to do, to
deliver
>> leveraging the differences. Yes,
exactly.
Everybody everybody on on cancer
metabolism is trying to do to leverage
the difference because in in cancer
metabolism is called rewiring. Right.
So, stem cells or highly proliferative
cells and cancer cells, they have things
in common.
But for adults, you don't really have
that much of
highly proliferating potential, so you
don't have cells that exhibit the same
principles like the cancer cells. So,
everybody's trying to leverage on this,
Mhm. see what works in cancer that
doesn't really work in normal and vice
versa and and and work on that.
>> Mhm. We're so interested in this because
things like obviously diet that can be
done to help a patient,
that's
>> [clears throat]
>> that's one thing that's got low
toxicity. Eating a ketogenic diet, I
mean, some might say, you know, it's
protein heavy and of course there's very
widely diverse schools of thought on the
whole subject of diet. Well, the Okay,
just
first of all, ketogenic is not that
protein heavy, it's fat heavy, but there
are keto versions which are protein
heavy. Okay. Uh but there are
diet regimes that could be used
by cancer patients, but they're not
widely available. For example, there are
there is a a protein regime in which is
deficient in the amino acids proline and
arginine. Mhm. And that seems to have a
really good effect Mhm. in xenografts,
meaning tumor implanted into into
animals. Mhm. Right now, you cannot go
into the store and get protein that's
deficient in proline and arginine. Mhm.
Okay. And that has to be done under
medical supervision. So, there are
several tricks up the oncoteam's sleeve
that can use and leverage this
difference, but it's not yet available
to the general public. Mhm. So, so apart
from the ketogenic diet and of course
staying away from all kind of
carbohydrates. The general public does
not have an opportunity to do much, but
ketogenic and and no carbs consumption
will help a lot. That should be done.
Mhm. I was at a metabolic conference
just last week,
and you know, a lot of the big thought
leaders in the world of integrated
medicine had been sort of waving the
banner for metabolic therapies for a
long time, including, of course, things
like IPT, insulin potentiated therapy,
and other ways to sort of tweak the
metabolism
to sort of weaken cancer, and then come
in with things like low-dose chemo. And
And that's been the approach. But I you
know, I think following your work is
going to be a great pleasure, and I hope
that we can continue to stay in touch
and hear about any developments as they
come up. The advancements in things like
immunotherapy and metabolic therapies is
where the leading edge of integrative,
or
I guess just cancer treatment as a whole
is heading and should be heading. Right.
I would very much like to see the
integration of the recent success of
GLP-1 agonists, like Wegovy or Ozempic,
with cancer therapy. Okay. Because, as I
mentioned, obesity is
a negative factor regarding cancer. And
now, you're having something that's
going to end the obesity pandemic. Mhm.
So, I think I would like to see I mean,
I would I would like to see
such kind of regimes be mainstream for
cancer patients. Obviously, those who
are obese, not for those who are not.
>> Right. One of the topics that we
discussed, which is a little
controversial in some quarters, is the
use of other repurposed drugs. You're
talking about adding in Ozempic maybe as
part of a protocol, especially where
obesity exists.
But um it's been floated out there, uh,
the use of these other anti-parasitic
drugs, fenbendazole and mebendazole. I'm
wondering where you land on that
subject.
>> I think that, uh, such kind of, uh,
anti-parasitic, anti-helminthic drugs
could help, but not from the point of
view of what people think, because
these, uh, drugs have side effects of
being, um,
uh, autophagy inhibitors. Autophagy is a
mechanism by which the cell, uh,
recycles its, uh, organelles or eats
itself.
And, uh, cancers rely on autophagy very
much. And if you inhibit autophagy,
that's bad for cancer. And a known side
effects of the anti-parasitic drugs is
inhibition of autophagy. I believe that
this is their means of working, not not
other means that have been put forward
to. So, so it could
>> Which we discussed as potentially
inhibiting the, um,
the tubules.
No, yes, I don't think I don't Yes, I
don't think I don't
>> still learning. Yes, yes, yes. It's not
quite understood.
>> Yes, I I I I mean, it could be that as
well, but I think they work because they
inhibit, uh, autophagy. Okay. So, and
the and the good news about it is that,
uh,
the anti-parasitic drugs, they were
originally made to inhibit, uh,
parasitic-specific metabolic pathways.
So, they're not expected to have many
side effects. Right.
>> Except the one that autophagy
inhibition, which is bad for cancer, so
therefore good for the patient. Mhm.
I've been fascinated by this
conversation, and, uh,
I wish I had more, uh, deep
understanding of, uh, biochemistry that
you
>> No, actually you have quite quite quite
a good understanding, though.
>> [laughter]
>> I do try. I try, you know. So, is there
anything else that you'd like to share
with our audience about, uh, now? Okay.
No, thank you. That's
>> Well, Dr. Stathopoulos, it's really been
a pleasure meeting with you. Thank you
so much for, uh, visiting with us and
and sharing. And of course, we wish you
all the best with your research, and
really feel like you're on to something
here. And
we, uh, we we encourage you in every way
we possibly can.
>> Thank you. If it if it not come from me,
it will definitely come from many
laboratories in the world who are
working on the same on the same aspect.
So
>> Fantastic. So so it will be on our
lifetime. I I certainly hope so. All
right. Let me show you a bit around.
Yeah, please. Okay. To show you. Yeah,
this is me
35 years ago.
>> [laughter]
>> As a student
>> Yes. here in this school. Yes. Yes. Yes.
You haven't changed much. Yeah, that's
me again
>> [laughter]
>> 30 years later. Okay.
So our department has
four main uh
let's say subsections. One is cystic
fibrosis at 3.2. There's an
electrophysiology lab.
Cystic fibrosis electrophysiology lab.
Okay. That's down that way. Yes.
And uh then our section
It's quite a nice space to work in.
Yeah. So this section is uh
mitochondria,
onco metabolism and and also
neurodegeneration.
Okay.
So this is just a cell culture facility.
This is where we keep um
um most of the uh cultured cells. So we
work with um animal animals and animal
models,
cell cultures, and uh and uh frozen
human tumor material. So in this in this
facility here, this is called an RPPA
facility. Okay. Um and uh in in these
fridges and some other ones is where we
are keeping the uh the tumor material.
The tumor material is being um
um used in such a way that from a single
tumor material, we can probe it
up to 900 times for different proteins.
>> Okay. And every time we probe something,
we usually do it from uh
almost a thousand different tumor
tissues.
So
>> using this DNA No, that's That's a
different That's a different thing.
Okay. So, how do you I'm I'm curious,
how do you probe it for
So, we we do a so-called uh we we look
for uh level of protein expression.
Okay.
>> So, what you need to do is that you um
you have to uh convert the tumor into a
liquid form, so you are able to work
with it. Okay. And then you can print
practically uh Let me Let me stop you.
So, you have frozen tumor tissue. Yes.
From that, you can grow it It comes back
to life and you can culture it or you
just have it
>> You could, but we we are we are
receiving it uh fresh. Okay. But we um
delipidated Okay. and we extract the
proteins. Okay. And then these proteins
are being
printed on uh on a slide that looks like
like this.
It doesn't It won't look much to you,
but I will I will show you an image
Sure.
what is on that. So, right now on this
one
there are
uh 11,000 tumor samples. Okay. Okay?
11,000?
>> 11,000.
So Wow.
It looks like it will take some time to
load. Sure.
>> [clears throat]
>> So, the this machine that we got is able
to print 1 billionth of a liter
of the tumor. Okay.
>> 1 billionth. Huh. And it's able to use
it from many different tumors. And uh it
So, so this one
is this one.
>> Okay. And
each one of them it's each
uh
dot what you see
is the protein of a particular person.
This is from one person, from another
person, from another person, from
another person. And you are able to
check the level of protein expression
of one person to another, but what we're
mostly interested is that we always take
both tumor material and healthy normal
adjacent material. So we compare the
level of expression in the healthy part
versus the normal part. Mhm. Now,
we can do this for hundreds of proteins
at a time. And if these proteins belong
to the same pathway, then we can have an
idea what is the flux of that particular
pathway. Mhm.
So and um
of course
um
humans are much more
uh they're much more um diff- I mean
when you use laboratory animals, they're
inbred, so their genetic background is
relatively the same. So there's not much
variability, but from humans there are.
Male, female, child, not child, you
know, black, Hispanic, whatever.
>> so you have a much greater variability,
but there's power in numbers. Once you
do this for 300, 400 people and you you
check the same thing, then you start
seeing differences. Mhm.
Um and this this facility here, the
capacity is 106,000 people.
And this is usually for
for let's say approximately we can take
material from 400, 500 hospitals
that have the possibility for extracting
a tumor. And that's approximately seven
countries. So this is the seventh
facility in Europe. Mhm. What we are
doing this.
>> Mhm. Yeah.
MD Anderson has three such facilities.
Mhm. For so MD Anderson is a is a main
workhorse for for doing such things.
>> Amazing. Yeah. So you're really able to
crunch a lot of data. Yes. Yes.
>> And and see things that kind of giving
you clues in terms of what to look for
>> Yes.
This one has a great diagnostic
potential because some drugs work for
some cancers, but not for other ones.
>> Okay. And depending on on what proteins
you see up or down regulated, you can
decide what kind of drugs to give or
not. We don't yet do this, but we could
do this. This is part of so-called
precision medicine, patient-tailored
medicine.
>> Right. It will be possible to combine
patient precision, I mean
patient-specific therapy with metabolic
aspect. Uh because um the metabolic
aspect is not all the same whether the
tumor is primary or secondary or does
the sizing, and in which tissue and and
what about the metabolic profile of the
patient. So, there is some potential,
some room to wiggle Mhm. and adjust the
metabolic therapy to the patient. That's
also possible. Mhm. Not to the extent as
for the chemotherapy, but still it's
also possible to do it there as well.
>> This is an imaging facility.
So, is this some kind of a dark field
microscopy thing?
>> Yes. Yes. Yes. So, in that we do our
live cells. This is This is a chamber
for maintaining humidity and
temperature. And uh we can follow their
Uh-huh. their I see. metabolic profile
over two or three days.
>> this is actually connected to the drug
testing. Yes. So, by the time you get
something that you're looking at, and
then you have an idea of how to affect
it, you would do the dosing of the Yes.
chemo or whatever here, and you'd look
to see how it actually interacts with
live tissue. Yeah. So, once you when you
you have to go through many levels of
checking. One is that you can check it
on the isolated protein. Okay? Then you
go on the isolated organelle, in our
case is mitochondria. Then you have to
go in mitochondria with its natural
environment, and that's the cell. Mhm.
So, you have to check it in cells. And
then you can go into a more complex
systems, like for example, a
a whole tissue, or a xenograft, or an
animal before going into primates and
humans. Mhm. So, there is there is a
there is a protocol.
>> Has any of your research gone that far?
Into primates or No, not yet. Just mouse
models is it as far Okay.
Good. Okay, thank you very much.
>> Thank you very much.
For now, for the Moss Report, I'm Ben
Moss. How are you [music] healing today?
>> [music]
[music]